[FEATURE] Document how the ViewHelper reference is generated (#423)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Guide-HowToDocument: Documentation/Maintainers/FluidViewHelper.rst

.. include:: /Includes.rst.txt
..  _fluid-viewhelper-reference-generation:

=====================================
Fluid ViewHelper reference generation
=====================================

The :ref:`Fluid ViewHelper Reference <t3viewhelper:start>` gets automatically
updated by changes to the according ViewHelper classes in the
`TYPO3 Core <https://github.com/TYPO3/typo3>`__ and
the package `Fluid Rendering Engine <https://github.com/TYPO3/Fluid>`__.

The generated documentation specifically depends on the phpDoc-style inline
comments on top of the ViewHelper classes as well as the configured arguments in their
php:`initializeArguments()` method.

> Context changes need to be made in those two repositories. For contributions

Author: No that was not by intend, I was sure I commited them

> Context changes need to be made in those two repositories. For contributions

Author: ```suggestion
Changes in wording or arguments thus need to be made inside the relevant files of these two repositories. For contributions
```

> Context changes need to be made in those two repositories. For contributions

Author: committed them now

.. include:: /Includes.rst.txt
..  _fluid-viewhelper-reference-generation:

=====================================
Fluid ViewHelper reference generation
=====================================

The :ref:`Fluid ViewHelper Reference <t3viewhelper:start>` gets automatically

> updated by changes to the according ViewHelper classes in the

Author: Moved the information in an extra sentence

`TYPO3 Core <https://github.com/TYPO3/typo3>`__ and
the package `Fluid Rendering Engine <https://github.com/TYPO3/Fluid>`__.

Context changes need to be made in those two repositories. For contributions
to the TYPO3 Core, follow the
:ref:`TYPO3 Contribution Guide - Core Development <t3contribute:recommended-reading>`.

..  _fluid-viewhelper-reference-generation-schema:

The Fluid ViewHelper schema generator
=====================================

The PHP files defining the ViewHelpers are transferred into :file:`schema.xsd`
files. The package `fluid-schema-generator <https://github.com/TYPO3/Fluid.SchemaGenerator>`__
is responsible for this step. So if information is already missing in the
:file:`schema.xsd`, adjustments need to be made here. The information from the

> :file:`schema.xsd` files is also used by IDEs for context sensitive help in

Author: I don't think this is our concern. All we have to know is that it is used in other contexts, too

editors etc.

> You can regenerate the :file:`schema.xsd` files for local testing like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can generate the :file:`schema.xsd` files yourself for local testing, like this:
```

..  code-block:: bash

    git clone git@github.com:typo3/typo3.git core
    cd core

>     composer require -o -n --no-progress typo3/fluid-schema-generator "^2.1"

Reviewer: Should we use a version here, that we may forget to update? Maybe just use "*" to use the most recent one...?

    mkdir -p ../schemas/typo3fluid/fluid/latest
    ./bin/generateschema TYPO3Fluid\\\Fluid > ../schemas/typo3fluid/fluid/latest/schema.xsd
    mkdir -p ../schemas/typo3/core/latest
    ./bin/generateschema TYPO3\\\CMS\\\Core > ../schemas/typo3/core/latest/schema.xsd
    mkdir -p ../schemas/typo3/fluid/latest
    ./bin/generateschema TYPO3\\\CMS\\\Fluid > ../schemas/typo3/fluid/latest/schema.xsd
    mkdir -p ../schemas/typo3/backend/latest
    ./bin/generateschema TYPO3\\\CMS\\\Backend > ../schemas/typo3/backend/latest/schema.xsd

> The TYPO3 Core will automatically install Fluid Rendering Engine in the version

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The composer step will automatically require the Fluid Rendering Engine in the version
```

> used by that Core version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used by the Core version you fetched via GIT (by default, `main`).
```

..  _fluid-viewhelper-reference-generation-rst:

> Generation of the reSTructured text files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Generation of the reStructuredText files
```

=========================================

> The :abbr:`rst (reSTructured text)` files get generated from the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :abbr:`rst (reStructuredText)` files get generated from the
```

:file:`schema.xsd` files (See section
:ref:`fluid-viewhelper-reference-generation-schema`) with the help of the
following tool:
`Fluid ViewHelper Documentation Generator <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/fluid-documentation-generator>`.

> So if the desired information is contained in the :file:`schema.xsd` files but

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If any of the ViewHelper source code documentation is only contained in the :file:`schema.xsd` files but
```

> not the rst sources, the problem might have to be fixed here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
not the generated standalone :file:`.rst` files, a bug in that generator may exist and needs adressing.
```

Do you have an idea of an example what kind of errors could exist here, that would create wrong RST from schema.xsd?

Also maybe one more sentence about the thing we talked today, something like this maybe:

```
Please note that the TYPO3 Core initially uses `reStructuredText` formatting 
inside the phpDoc comments already,  and this is passed on to the :file:`schema.xsd` 
files with exactly that formatting. 
IDEs may want to interpret  these schemas with expected HTML or MarkDown syntax, 
so you may see raw `reStructuredText` output in this case. 
The generated Documentation for `docs.typo3.org` takes care of 
transforming the generated  :file:`.rst` files to HTML, by utilizing the
`https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/render-guides`__ project.
```

..  _fluid-viewhelper-reference-generation-html:

Rendering the ViewHelper reference to HTML
==========================================

> The :abbr:`rst (reSTructured text)` files generated in step

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The :abbr:`rst (reStructuredText)` files generated in step
```

:ref:`fluid-viewhelper-reference-generation-rst` will be saved by the
:ref:`GitHub action <fluid-viewhelper-reference-generation-github-action>` into

> repository `Fluid ViewHelper Reference <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Reference-ViewHelper>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the repository `Fluid ViewHelper Reference <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Reference-ViewHelper>`.
```

In this repository all files not overridden by the
`Fluid ViewHelper Documentation Generator <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/fluid-documentation-generator>`
are maintained, Including the start page :file:`Index.rst` and the
:ref:`guides.xml <settings-guides-xml>`. This repository is then rendered by
the standard rendering process.

..  _fluid-viewhelper-reference-generation-github-action:

GitHub action "Fluid ViewHelper Documentation"
==============================================

All processes described above are combined for automatic execution as a GitHub

> action in the repository `t3docs-ci-deploy <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/t3docs-ci-deploy>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
action in the repository `t3docs-ci-deploy <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/t3docs-ci-deploy>`__.
It is triggered automatically once a day, or can be executed manually through the GitHub UI by the TYPO3 Documentation team.
```

> Watch for failed or stuck `Actions <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/t3docs-ci-deploy/actions>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maintainers needs to occasionally watch for failed or stuck `Workflow runs <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/t3docs-ci-deploy/actions>`__.
```
